 
 
July 2020 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR 
AICTE – PRAGATI SCHOLARSHIP 
SCHEME FOR GIRL STUDENTS - 
(DEGREE) 
 
 
2020-21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR AICTE – PRAGATI SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR GIRL 
STUDENTS (DEGREE)  
 
1.0 OBJECTIVE OF THE SCHEME: 
Scheme being implemented by AICTE aim ed at providing assistance for advancement of 
Girls pursuing technical e ducation. Education is one of the most important means of 
empowering women with the knowledge, skill and s elf-confidence necessary to participate 
fully in the development process. Th is is an attempt to give young w omen the opportunity to 
further her education and prepare for a successful future by “Empowering Women through 
Technical Education”. 
 
2.0 ELIGIBILITY FOR SCHOLARSHIP: 
1) The girl candidate should be admitted to First year of Degree level course  
OR 
Second year of Degree level course through lateral entry  in any of the  AICTE 
approved Institution of respective year. 
2) Maximum two girl child per family are eligible. 
3) Family income from all sources should not be more than Rs. 8 lakh per annum during 
the current financial year. A valid income certificate issued by State/ UT Government 
need to be enclosed.  
3.0 NUMBER OF SCHOLARSHIPS: 
1) A total of 5,000 scholarships are earmarked per annum under this scheme for pursuing 
First year of Degree level course OR Second year of Degree level course through 
lateral entry in any of the AICTE approved Institution s. The number of scholarships 
are transferred into AICTE – PRAGATI SCHOLARSHIP S CHEME FOR GIRL 
STUDENTS (DIPLOMA ), if sufficient number of online applications are not 
received.  
2) State/ Union Territory wise distribution of 5,000 scholarships is as per Annexure A.     
3) In addition to 5,000 scholarships at point number 2, all eligible girls who submit 
online scholarship form, from following  13 Union Territories and North Eastern 
States i.e. Andaman and Nicobar Islands (UT), Jammu and Kashmir (UT), Ladakh 
(UT), Dadra and Nagar Haveli & Da man and Diu (UT) , Lakshadweep (UT), 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim & 
Tripura will be given scholarship by AICTE.  
 
4.0 AMOUNT OF SCHOLARSHIP: 
1) Rs. 50,000/- per annum for every year of study i.e. maximum 4 years for first year 
admitted students and maximum 3 years for second year admitted students through 

 
 
lateral entry as lump sum amount towards payment of college fee, purchase of 
computer, stationeries, books, equipments, softwares etc.  No other additional grant  
will be payable in lieu of hostel charges and medical charges etc. 
2) No documentary proof need to be attached for the above while availing benefits. 
 
5.0 MODE OF PAYMENT: 
After selection, the awardee will be paid scholarship through DBT mode on annual basis. 
 
6.0 PROCEDURE FOR APPLYING: 
1) The candidate fulfilling the eligibility conditions is required to apply online on 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP) after initiation of application process and notice to 
be published on AICTE website. 
2) The host instituti on where the candidate is studying , required to verify the online 
application.  
3) Department of Technical Education (DTE) of respective State/  UT will verify these 
applications as second level of scrutiny. 
 
7.0 CRITERIA OF SELECTION: 
1) The selection of candidate will be carried out solely on the basis of merit of qualifying 
examination to peruse the Technical Degree course from any of the AICTE approved 
institutions i.e. in First year or Second year (through lateral entry only) on the basis of 
percentage of marks obtained in the 10+2/ equivalent examination. 
2) State/ UT wise merit list will be prepared as per number of scholarships allotted in the 
point number 3.0 above.  
8.0 METHODS OF RESOLVING TIES: 
The procedure to be adopted for breaking ties (similar percentiles) shall be as under: - 
1) Percentage of Marks in 10 th Examination: In case qualifying examination percentile 
does not break ties, then  higher percentage of marks in 10 th examination will be ranked 
higher. 
2) Age: In case 10th examination percentile does not break ties, then the candidate of elder 
age will be ranked higher. 
 
9.0 RESERVATION: 
1) As per Government of India norms.  
2) If there is any vacant seat in any of the reserved category (SC/  ST/ OBC), the same will 
be transferred to the General Category.  
10.0 RENEWALS: 
1) The scholarship will be renewed for the next year of study on receipt of renewal 
through National Scholarship Portal by submitting passing certificate/  marksheet 
along with letter from the Head of the Institution on the online portal. 
 
 
2) Student failing to get promoted to the next class/ level would forfeit the scholarship. 
 
 
11.0 TERMS AND CONDITIONS: 
1) The gap period between the year of passing the qualifying examina tion and the 
session of admission in degree course should not be more than two years. 
2) Applications will be invited once  in a year through National e -Scholarship Portal of 
the Government of India.  
3) If a student is in reserved category and also qualified in General Category merit list of 
scholarship, then she will be counted under the General Category. 
4) Incomplete applications will be summarily rejected. Only verified online applications 
will be considered for the award of scholarship. 
5) If a candidate failed/ drop out in subsequent year, she will not be eligible for further 
scholarship. 
6) The grant of scholarship is subject to the condition that the student does not receive 
any financial assistance in shape of scholarship/any emoluments, salary, stipend etc. 
from any other source during her course of study in the Institute. In case of receipt of 
any financial assistance from any other sources, the scholarship shall be discontinued 
and the entire amount of scholarship will have to be refunded to AICTE by D/Draft 
drawn in favour of “Member Secretary, AICTE” payable at New Delhi. 
7) Scheme will be implemented and monitored by the AICTE. 
8) For converting Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) to percentage, multiplying 
factor will be 9.5 i.e. to convert the CGPA into percent age; CGPA X 9.5 will give the 
percentage. 
9) In case both CGPA & t otal marks are given in the mark sheet, total marks will be 
considered for determining percentage. 
10) If grades are given like A1, A2, B1, B2 etc . in the mark sheet, first the grades will be 
converted into CGPA and then average CGPA will be calculated. This CGPA will be 
converted into percentage as given in point No. 8. 
11) Provisional list of shortlisted candidates will be uploaded on the AICTE web por tal. 
In case, candidate has any query about merit list of scholarship, they may raise their 
grievances within a month. No query regarding merit list will be entertained after one-
month duration from the date of publishing of merit list on AICTE website. 
12) Query regarding non -payment of the scholarship due to invalid/  wrong account 
number will be entertained only upto six months from the date of publishing of merit 
list on AICTE website. 
  
 
 
Annexure A 
State-wise Distribution of No. of Scholarships in the Degree Course 
S. No. State/ UT No. of Scholarships 
1 Andhra Pradesh 566 
2 Bihar 52 
3 Chandigarh (UT) 50 
4 Chhattisgarh 62 
5 Delhi (NCT) 50 
6 Goa 50 
7 Gujarat 219 
8 Haryana 134 
9 Himachal Pradesh 50 
10 Jharkhand 50 
11 Karnataka 398 
12 Kerala 196 
13 Madhya Pradesh 285 
14 Maharashtra 553 
15 Odisha 134 
16 Puducherry (UT) 50 
17 Punjab 124 
18 Rajasthan 152 
19 Tamil Nadu 800 
20 Telangana 424 
21 Uttar Pradesh 422 
22 Uttarakhand 50 
23 West Bengal 129 
  Total 5000 
   
   S.No. State/ UT No. of Scholarships 
1 Andaman and Nicobar Islands (UT) 
All Eligible Applicants 
2 Dadra and Nagar Haveli & Daman and Diu (UT) 
3 Jammu and Kashmir (UT)  
4 Ladakh (UT) 
5 Lakshadweep (UT) 
6 Arunachal Pradesh 
7 Assam 
8 Manipur 
9 Meghalaya 
10 Mizoram 
11 Nagaland 
12 Sikkim 
13 Tripura 
 
Note: State-wise distribution of scholarships is based upon proportionate share of allotted degree seats (in AICTE 
approved institutions ) to that particular State/  UT with minimum  50 scholarships and maximum cap of 800 
scholarships.     