 
 
July 2020 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR 
AICTE – SAKSHAM SCHOLARSHIP 
SCHEME FOR SPECIALLY-ABLED 
STUDENT (DIPLOMA)  
 
 
2020-21 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
GUIDELINES FOR AICTE - SAKSHAM SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR SPECIALLY- 
ABLED STUDENT (DIPLOMA) 
1.0 OBJECTIVE OF THE SCHEME: 
Saksham is a MHRD Scheme being implemented by AICTE aimed at providing encouragement 
and support to specially -abled children to pursue technical education. This is an attempt to give 
every young student, who is otherwise specially -abled, the opportunity to study further and 
prepare for a successful future through technical education/ knowledge. 
2.0 ELIGIBILITY FOR SCHOLARSHIP: 
1) The candidate should be admitted to First year of Diploma  level course OR Second year 
of Diploma level course through lateral entry in any of the AICTE approved Institution of 
respective year. 
2) Specially-abled student, having disability of not less than 40%. 
3) Family income from all sources should not be more than Rs. 8 lakh per annum during the 
current financial year. A valid income certificate issued by State /UT Government need to 
be enclosed.  
 
3.0 NUMBER OF SCHOLARSHIPS: 
All eligible specially-abled student admitted to F irst year of Diploma level course OR Second 
year of Diploma level course through lateral entry in any of the AICTE approved Institution will 
get the scholarship. 
 
4.0 AMOUNT OF SCHOLARSHIP: 
1) Rs. 50,000/- per annum for every year of study i.e. maximum 3 years for first year 
admitted students and maximum 2 years second year admitted students  through lateral 
entry as lump sum amount towards payment of college fee, purchase of computer, 
stationeries, books, equipments, softwares etc.  No other additional grant will be payable 
in lieu of hostel charges and medical charges etc. 
2) No documentary proof need to be attached for the above while availing benefits. 
 
5.0 MODE OF PAYMENT: 
After selection, the awardee will be paid scholarship through DBT mode on annual basis. 

 
 
6.0 PROCEDURE FOR APPLYING: 
1) The candidate fulfilling the eligibility conditions is required to apply online on National 
Scholarship Portal (NSP) after initiation of application process and notice to be published on 
AICTE website. 
2) The host institution where the candidate is studying, required to verify the online application.  
3) Department of Technical Education (DTE) of respective State/ UT will verify these 
applications as second level of scrutiny. 
 
7.0 RENEWALS: 
1) The scholarship will be renewed for the next year of study on receipt of renewal through 
National Scholarship Portal by submitting passing certificate/  marksheet along with letter 
from the Head of the Institution on the online portal. 
2) Student failing to get promoted to the next class/ level would forfeit the scholarship. 
 
8.0 TERMS AND CONDITIONS: 
1) The gap period between the year of passing the qualifying examination and the session of 
admission in diploma course should not be more than two years. 
2) Applications will be invited once in a year through National e -Scholarship Portal of the  
Government of India.  
3) Incomplete applications will be summarily rejected. Only verified online applications  will be 
considered for the award of scholarship. 
4) If a candidate failed/ drop out in subsequent year, she / he  will not be eligible for further 
scholarship. 
5) The grant of scholarship is subject to the condition that the student does not receive any 
financial assistance in shape of scholarship/any emoluments, salary, stipend etc. from any 
other source during her/ his course of study in the Institute. In case of receipt of any financial 
assistance from any other sources, the scholarship shall be discontinued and the entire 
amount of scholarship will have to be refunded to AICTE by D/Draft drawn in favour of 
“Member Secretary, AICTE” payable at New Delhi. 
6) Scheme will be implemented and monitored by the AICTE. 
7) For converting Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) to percentage, multiplying factor will 
be 9.5 i.e. to convert the CGPA into percentage; CGPA X 9.5 will give the percentage. 
8) In case both CGPA & total marks are given in the mark sheet, total marks will be considered 
for determining percentage. 
9) If grades are given like A1, A2, B1, B2 etc . in the mark sheet, first the grades will be 
converted into CGPA and then average CGPA will be calculated. This CGPA will be 
converted into percentage as given in point No. 7. 
10) Provisional list of shortlisted candidates will be uploaded on the AICTE web portal. In case, 
candidate has any query about merit list  of scholarship, they may raise their grievances 
within a month. No query regarding merit list will be entertained after one -month duration 
from the date of publishing of merit list on AICTE website.  
 
 
11) Query regarding non -payment of the scholarship due to i nvalid/wrong account number will 
be entertained only upto six months from the date of publishing of merit list on AICTE 
website. 