May 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AICTE – SWANATH SCHOLARSHIP 
SCHEME FOR STUDENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Student Development Cell (StDC) 
All India Council for Technical Education 
Vasant Kunj, Nelson Mandela Marg 
New Delhi- 110070 
Page 2 of 8  
GUIDELINES FOR AICTE – SWANATH SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR STUDENTS 
1.0 OBJECTIVE OF THE SCHEME: 
The Scheme is being implemented by AICTE to provide encouragement and support to orphans, wards of parents 
died due to Covid-19, wards of Armed Forces and Central Paramilitary Forces martyred in action (Shaheed) to 
pursue education. This is an attempt to give every such child, an opportunity to study further and prepare for a 
successful future through education in AICTE Approved institutions and courses. 
2.0 ELIGIBILITY FOR SCHOLARSHIP: 
1) The candidate should be from any one of the following categories: 
(i) Orphan 
OR 
(ii) Either or both parents died due to Covid 19 
OR 
(iii) Wards of Armed Forces and Central Paramilitary Forces martyred in action (Shaheed) 
                                           OR 
(iv) Parent is suffering from critical life threatening disease (Like Cancer etc.)/ Died or severely  
disabled (above 80%) in accident (as per RPwD Act 2016) 
AND 
2) Family income from all sources should not be more than Rs. 8 lakh per annum during the financial 
year of the application. A valid income certificate issued by State/UT Government is to be enclosed. 
AND 
3) The candidate should be currently studying in the AICTE Approved institutions and courses at Degree/ 
Diploma level in regular mode (in 1st /2nd / 3rd /4th year). 
AND 
4) The candidate should NOT be Recipient of any of the Central Govt. / State Govt. / AICTE 
Sponsored scholarships. 
Note:  Students who are satisfying conditions at S. No. 1, 2, 3 & 4 above are only eligible for this scholarship. 
3.0 NUMBER OF SCHOLARSHIPS: 
A maximum of 2000 scholarships (1000 for Degree Students and 1000 for Diploma Students) will be awarded 
every year to eligible candidates as above. 
4.0 AMOUNT OF SCHOLARSHIP: 
Rs. 50,000.00 per annum for every year of study i.e. maximum 4 years  duration for first year admitted Degree 
students and maximum 3 years for Diploma Students as lump sum amount towards payment of college fee, 
purchase of computer, stationeries, books, equipment, software etc. No other additional grant will be payable in 
lieu of hostel charges and medical charges etc. In case student is currently studying in the 2 nd /3rd/4th year at 
degree level the duration of the scholarship will be reduced to 3/2/1 year respectively. Similarly, for students 
currently studying in the 2nd /3rd year at diploma level the duration of the scholarship will be reduced to 2/1 year 
respectively. 
Page 4 of 8 
 
5.0 CRITERIA OF SELECTION: 
(i) For Degree Level: 
The selection of candidate will be carried out solely on the basis of merit of qualifying examination to pursue 
the Degree course from any of the AICTE approved institutions i.e. on the basis of percentage of marks obtained 
in the 10+2/ equivalent examination. 
(ii) Method of Resolving ties (For Degree Level): 
The procedure to be adopted for breaking ties (similar percentiles) shall be as under: - 
A) Percentage of Marks in 10th Examination: In case qualifying examination percentile does not break ties, 
then higher percentage of marks in 10th examination will be ranked higher. 
B) Age: In case 10th examination percentile does not break ties, then the candidate of elder age will be ranked 
higher. 
C) Annual family income: If above methods do not break ties, and then the candidate with lower annual family 
income will be ranked higher. 
(iii) For Diploma Level: 
The selection of candidate will be carried out solely on the basis of merit of qualifying examination to pursue 
the Diploma course from any of the AICTE approved institutions i.e. on the basis of percentage of marks obtained 
in the 10th / equivalent examination. 
(iv) Method of Resolving ties (For Diploma Level): 
The procedure to be adopted for breaking ties (similar percentiles) shall be as under: - 
A) Age: In case qualifying examination percentile does not break ties, then the candidate of elder age will be 
ranked higher. 
B) Annual family income: If above method does not break ties, and then the candidate with lower annual family 
income will be ranked higher. 
6.0 RESERVATION: 
As per Government of India norms. 
 
7.0 PROCEDURE FOR APPLYING: 
1) The candidate fulfilling the eligibility conditions is required to apply online on National Scholarship Portal 
(NSP) after initiation of application process and notice to be published on AICTE/NSP website. 
2) The host institution where the candidate is studying, will be required to verify the online application. 
3) Department of Education (DTE) of respective State/ UT will verify these applications as second level of 
scrutiny. 
 
Page 3 of 6 

Page 4 of 8  
8.0 RENEWALS: 
1) The scholarship will be renewed for the next year of study on receipt of renewal through National 
Scholarship Portal (NSP) by submitting promotion certificate along with bonafide certificate from the 
Head of the Institution on the NSP portal. 
2) Student failing to get promoted to the next class/ level or those who are not applying in time for the 
scholarship, would forfeit the scholarship. 
9.0 MODE OF PAYMENT: 
After selection, the awardee will be paid scholarship through DBT mode on annual basis. 
10.0 DOCUMENTS TO BE UPLOADED ON NATIONAL SCHOLARSHIP PORTAL: 
A. For Orphan Candidates: 
(i) Death Certificates of both Father & Mother (if available) 
OR 
A certificate issued by Tehsildar / S D M as per enclosed format (Annexure – I). 
(ii) Bonafide Certificate issued by the institution. 
(iii) 10+2 / equivalent and 10th Mark sheet for Degree Level 
(iv) 10th /equivalent Mark sheet for Diploma Level 
(v) Category Certificate (SC/ST/OBC-NCL) 
B. For Candidates whose either or both Parents Died due to Covid 19: 
(i) Death Certificate of Father/Mother or both explicitly mentioning that the death was due 
to Covid-19. 
(ii) If one parent (Father or Mother) is alive, current year income certificate, explicitly 
mentioning that income of family less than 8 Lakh, issued by Competent Authority. 
(iii) Bonafide Certificate issued by the institution. 
(iv) 10+2/equivalent and 10th Mark sheet for Degree Level 
(v) 10th /equivalent Mark sheet for Diploma Level 
(vi) Category Certificate (SC/ST/OBC-NCL) 
 
C. For Wards of Armed Forces and Central Paramilitary Forces martyred in action (Shaheed) 
(i) Death Certificate. 
(ii) Shaheed Certificate issued by the Armed Forces/ Central Paramilitary Forces 
(iii) Bonafide Certificate issued by the institution. 
(iv) 10+2/equivalent and 10th Mark sheet for Degree Level 
(v) 10th /equivalent Mark sheet for Diploma Level 
(vi) Current year income certificate, explicitly mentioning that income of family less than 8 
Lakh, issued by Competent Authority. 
(vii) Category Certificate (SC/ST/OBC-NCL) 
 
11.0 TERMS AND CONDITIONS: 
1) Applications will be invited once in a year through National e-Scholarship Portal of the Government of 
India. 
2) Incomplete applications will be summarily rejected. Only verified online applications will be considered 
for the award of scholarship. 
3) ‘AADHAR number is Mandatory for applying for this scheme. Applications will not be accepted 
without the AADHAR number of the Candidate.’ 
4) If a candidate fails/ drops out in subsequent year, he / she will not be eligible for further scholarship. 
5) The grant of scholarship is subject to the condition that the student does not receive any financial 
assistance in shape of scholarship/any emoluments, salary, stipend etc. from any other source during her/ 
his course of study in the Institute. In case of receipt of any financial assistance from any other sources, 
the scholarship shall be discontinued and the entire amount of scholarship will have to be refunded to 
AICTE by D/Draft drawn in favour of “Member Secretary, AICTE” payable at New Delhi. 
6) Scheme will be implemented and monitored by the AICTE. 
7) For converting Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) to percentage, multiplying factor will be 9.5 
i.e. to convert the CGPA into percentage; CGPA X 9.5 will give the percentage. 
8) In case both CGPA & Total marks are given in the mark sheet, total marks will be considered for 
determining percentage. 
9) If grades are given like A1, A2, B1, B2 etc. in the mark sheet, first the grades will be converted into 
CGPA and then average CGPA will be calculated. This CGPA will be converted into percentage as given 
in point No. 7. 
10) For the purpose of the calculation of percentage in 10+2, marks secured by candidate in any five subjects 
taken in 10+2 of various boards (CBSE/ISC etc) to be considered. 
11) Provisional list of shortlisted candidates will be uploaded on the AICTE web portal. In case, candidate 
has any query about merit list of scholarship, they may raise their grievances within a month. No query 
regarding merit list will be entertained after one-month duration from the date of publishing of merit list 
on AICTE website. 
12) Query regarding non-payment of the scholarship due to invalid/ wrong account number will be 
entertained only up to six months from the date of publishing of merit list on AICTE website. 
 
Page 5 of 6 
Page 6 of 6  
Annexure - I 
 
SWANATH SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME OF AICTE 
 
CERTIFICATE FOR ORPHAN CANDIDATE 
 
 
This to certify that Mr. /Ms.    , date of birth  
resident of is an orphan. 
His / Her parents Sh.     Died on    
and Smt.   Died on   
 
 
 
Date : Signature of SDM /Tehsildar: 
Rubber Stamp & Seal of Signing Authority 
Name : 
Designation: 
Office Address: 
 
Tele No. : 