Scholarships Division, Department of Higher Education 
Ministry of Education, Government of India 
 
SPECIAL SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME FOR THE STUDENTS OF UNION TERRITORIES OF 
JAMMU & KASHMIR  AND LADAKH (SSS J&K AND LADAKH) UNDER THE PRADHAN 
MANTRI UCHCHATAR SHIKSHA PROTSAHAN (PM-USP) YOJANA DURING ACADEMIC 
YEAR 2025-2026 
1. BACKGROUND 
An Expert Group was constituted by the Prime Minister on 18th August, 2010 in the context of enhancing 
employment opportunities among youths  of Union  Territories of  Jammu & Kashmir  and Ladakh to 
formulate job plan involving public and private sectors. Among the key recommendations of the Expert 
Group, one was to offer 5000 fresh scholarships per annum to encourage the youth of J&K and Ladakh to 
pursue higher studies  outside the UTs.  The proposal arises out  of the  identified strategy of a human 
resource development initiative focused on improving skill set through improving access to education. 
2. OBJECTIVE 
To provide academic fee (tuition and other admissible fee) and maintenance allowance (to bear expenses 
on account of hostel & mess fee, cost of books and other incidental charges) to students belonging to J&K 
and Ladakh who, after passing Class XII or equivalent examination, secure admission in Government 
colleges/institutions and other select institutions outside the UTs of J&K and Ladakh through AICTE’s 
counselling process under the supernumerary quota created by the Government except in medical 
courses. Scheme was launched in the year 2011 and modified from time to time to make  the scheme 
student friendly. The scheme also envisages to build capacities of the youth of J&K and Ladakh to enable 
them to compete with their peers in the national mainstream. 
3. SCOPE 
Under the scheme 5000 fresh scholarships are available per annum. Out of these, 2070 scholarships are 
for General Degree Courses, 2830 for Professional/Engineering courses and 100 for Medical Courses. The 
number of scholarships for Engineering and Medical Studies would be kept flexible, subject to the ceiling 
of 5000 fresh sch olarships per annum and subject to the savings accruing from any shortfall in the 
number of students opting for General Degree courses. 
4. RATE OF SCHOLARSHIPS, ACADEMIC FEE & MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE PER ANNUM: 
 
 
Stream 
Number of 
Scholarships 
Academic Fee 
(Upper limit) 
Maintenance 
Charges 
(Fixed) 
General Degree 2070 Rs.30,000/-  
 
 
 
Rs.1.00 Lakh* 
Professional/Engineering/ B.Sc. 
Nursing /B. Pharmacy/B. 
Architecture (subject to NATA)/ 
HMCT Degree/BA LLB (in National 
Law Colleges only) 
 
2830 
 
Rs.1.25 Lakh 
Medical/BDS or equivalent 
Medical Stream (subject to 
NEET, wherever applicable) 
100 Rs.3.00 Lakh 
Total No. of Scholarships 5000   
*Not exceeding Rs.1.00 Lakh per annum (Ten equal instalments to meet hostel, mess, books, stationery & other incidentals). Fresh students 
admitted in the academic session 2025-26 will be paid maintenance allowance from the date of joining the institute. 
 
Flexibility for deciding fees to be reimbursed for certain courses rests with the Inter -Ministerial 
Committee (IMC), within the overall ceiling. 
5. DISBURSEMENT OF SCHOLARSHIP: 
(i) Scholarship towards academic fee will be paid directly to the Institution as per claim or as per 
rate fixed by respective State Fee Regulatory Authority or as fixed by any Regulatory Authority 
appointed by the Government, whichever is less and within the overall ceiling fixed for the 
course. All the Institutions may note that upper ceiling of Academic Fee inclusive of all 
admissible components taken together is Rs. 1.25 Lakh for  Professional / Engineering Stream; 
Rs. 30,000/- for General Stream and Rs. 3.00 Lakh for  Medical Stream. Even if the total fee  of 
institute is more than the ceiling, neither AICTE shall reimburse extra amount nor institute can 
charge the same from the students. 
(ii) The fixed maintenance allowance Rs.1.00 lakh per annum for all streams will be paid to the bank 
account of the student through DBT using PFMS gateway. Maintenance Allowance during first 
year will be released in 9(Nine) instalments, first instalment of which will be of Rs. 20,000/- and 
subsequent 8 monthly instalments will be of Rs. 10,000/- each. 
(iii) From 2nd year onwards fixed maintenance allowance of Rs. 1.00 lakh per beneficiary will be  
paid in 10 (Ten) monthly instalments of Rs. 10,000/- each. 
6. ELIGIBILITY: 
(i) Candidates should be domicile of Union Territories of J&K and Ladakh. 
(ii) Students must have passed 12th examination from JKBOSE or CBSE affiliated schools located in 
UTs of J&K and Ladakh. 
(iii) Having family income of Rs. 8.00 Lakh or less per annum. 
(iv) Candidates who want to take admission under Lateral Entry Scheme have to pass Diploma in 
Engineering from the Polytechnic Institutes recognized by Directorate of Technical Education 
(DTE), UTs of J&K and Ladakh. 
(v) Candidates are compulsorily required to apply online on  the AICTE web -portal and 
verify their documents  through nearest Facilitation Centers of J&K and Ladakh within 
time frame. 
(vi) Admission under Lateral Entry Scheme will be subject to allocation of seats / vacant seats of 
the preceding year in Engineering Stream and in the relevant stream only. 
(vii) Merit list will be prepared for HSC and Lateral Entry students and the same shall be displayed 
on the student’s portal only for conduction of online counselling for final allotment of seats in 
colleges to eligible candidate’s subject to choice filling/availability of scholarships. 
7. EXCLUSIONS: 
Categories of Candidates NOT eligible under the SSSJ&KL: 
(i) Candidates pursing courses through Open Universities. 
(ii) Student availing benefit of any other scholarship Scheme from any Central/State/UT 
Government Schemes or any scheme run by any autonomous body under them. 
(iii) Candidates gaining admission through ‘Management Quota’. 
(iv) Candidates pursuing Diploma course. 
(v) Candidates pursuing Post-Graduate level studies, in any discipline. 
(vi) Candidates having family income over Rs. 8.00 Lakh per annum. 
(vii) Not applied through online registration in the AICTE Portal. 
(viii) Taking admission in the Colleges other than the prescribed colleges given in AICTE Portal. 
(ix) Admission through Agents / NGOs. 
8. INSTITUTES / COLLEGES PARTICIPATING: 
Inter- Ministerial Committee, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India in its 26th Meeting held on 
6th July, 2023 has decided that the scholarships will only be provided to the eligible J&K and 
Ladakh students who take admission (through choice filling on AICTE Portal/ on their own) 
in institutions who meets one of the following criteria: 
1. Students should take admission in General or Professional Stream courses only in 
institutions 
having Accreditation by National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) Grade 3.0. 
or 
 
2. Top 100 Institutions as per ranking provided by National Institution Ranking 
Framework (NIRF), Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. 
or 
3. All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) approved institutions having 
accreditation of 30% or more courses by National Board of Accreditation (NBA), New 
Delhi. 
or 
4. Institutions having more than 80% admission consecutively for last 5 Academic Years. 
5. For Medical students, the existing process as specified by the National Medical Council 
shall continue. 
6. All Government Institutions in addition to institutions fulfilling NAAC/ NIRF/ NBA 
criteria approved by 26th IMC for B. Sc. (Nursing), B. Pharmacy and Hotel Management 
and Catering Technology Courses. 
7. Hostel facility criteria is to be relaxed for General Stream courses or any other quality 
institution located in Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore, Pune and Hyderabad etc. 
8. Chairman, AICTE is authorized to take final decision and relax conditions, if any. 
9. ADMISSION IN IITs/ NITs/CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES/GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS/ 
AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE ON THEIR OWN: 
(i) Aspirants desiring to take admission through JEE Mains/JEE Advance/CUET in IITs, NITs, 
IISc., IISER and Centrally Funded Institutions with National Importance may be considered, 
if student participates in online counselling by filling their JEE Mains/JEE Advance roll 
numbers with respective admit card and result and wherever SSS J&K and Ladakh quota is 
not available. 
(ii) All Medical aspirants seeking admission in BDS/MBBS streams are required to appear in 
NEET examinations and get qualified for admission. However, they should initially register 
on AICTE portal by submitting their complete details including NEET roll number and get 
their documents verified by Facilitation Centre as per the procedure. After securing their 
admission to college through NEET counselling, they are required to upload their allotment 
letter along with NEET score card and joining report to become eligible subje ct to 
availability of scholarship. It may be noted that admission under  ‘Management Quota’ is 
not allowed as per the scheme guidelines. 
(iii) It is decided by the Dental Council of  India vide letter No.DE -14-AC-Academic-MDC-
2021/1099 dated 23rd July, 2021 that all Private Dental Colleges under its umbrella will not 
admit more than 5(Five) students per institution under Prime Minister’s Special 
Scholarship Scheme for the Union Territories of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh with effect 
from academic session 2021- 22 onwards. The copy of the letter is available on the portal 
of AICTE for information of stakeholders. 
(iv) Aspirants seeking admission in Architecture Programme are required to qualify NATA 
and their admission to Architecture course through AICTE Portal would be confirmed after 
uploading their NATA result and admit card. 
(v) Aspirants seeking admission in Integrated Law Course (B.A.LLB) are required to qualify 
CLAT and their admission to law course through AICTE Portal would be confirmed after 
uploading their CLAT result and admit card. Admission in the law course of National Law 
University (NLU) will only be considered for this scholarship. 
All the students who will be taking admission on their own in the above mentioned institutions will 
be allotted seats under SSS J&K and Ladakh subject registration, merit, reservation policy of the UT 
of Jammu & Kashmir and availability of scholarships. 
10. DURATION OF SCHOLARSHIPS 
The scholarships granted under the scheme are renewed in subsequent classes subject to good 
conduct and maintenance of attendance as prescribed by the respective institution. Students failing 
to get promoted to the next class / level would get the scholarship in the following year subject to 
the condition that if the student fails again for the second time, then he / she would  forfeit the 
scholarship and the scholarship would not be renewed for the subsequent years. If a scholar unable 
to appear in the annual examination owing to illness and / or on account of any unforeseen incident, 
the scholarship may be renewed for the next academic year on submission of medical certificate 
and other proof to satisfy the Head of the Institution who will also certify the same. Scholarship will 
not be paid twice for the same year of study. 
11. ONLINE ADMISSION PROCESS: 
A. Admission under 10+2 Scheme and through Lateral Entry 
Candidates who have passed 10+2 examination from JKBOSE or CBSE affiliated schools / passed 
Diploma in Engineering from Polytechnics approved by Directorate of Technical Education, Govt. of 
J&K, located in UTs of J&K and Ladakh in the academic year 2023-24 and 2024-25 can only submit 
their application on AICTE Portal for registration of the scheme. Candidates are advised to fill exact 
particulars as furnished at the time of registration for class 10+2 examination. Candidates whose 
credentials do not match with the particulars available in AICTE-Portal will not be able to register 
online. On successful registration, eligible candidates will be issued username and password t o fill 
online form on AICTE Portal. The UTs of J&K and Ladakh through various Facilitation Centers, assist 
the students in submission of online application and verification of the following original documents 
to ascertain their eligibility under the Scheme: 
1. Certificate of domicile of the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir or Ladakh 
2. Certificate of Class 12th and 10th Examination (for candidates who have passed class 
12th examination) 
3. Polytechnic Diploma Certificate (for Diploma candidates) 
4. Income Certificate issued by the competent authority of UT of Jammu & Kashmir or UT of Ladakh. 
5. Students applying under reserved quota must produce Caste  Certificate (SC/ST/SEBC/EWS) 
issued by Union Territory Authorities. 
6. Persons with Disabilities (PwD) must submit Disability Certificate 
(Disability 40% and above asper Central Government Norms). 
12. DOCUMENT VERIFICATION and CHOICE FILLING: 
The applicant is required to get his/her uploaded documents verified with the originals at the 
nearest Facilitation Centre set-up by UTs of J&K and Ladakh and get it verified and uploaded with 
stamp on portal of Facilitation Centers. After document verification from the facilitation center the 
candidate should  collect the  copy of document verification report without fail. The choice filling 
window would be activated for only those candidates having successfully registered and got their 
documents verified at any one of the Facilitation Centers. The choice filling window will be blocked 
on the last date, after that no change would be allo wed in order of preference . The merit list will 
be displayed on the student’s portal only subject to the declaration of result . Provisional 
Merit list is generated based on Class XII / Diploma results. The students, whose name appear 
in the provisional merit list are compulsorily required to attend the counseling. Allotment of 
the seat will be done through online counselling process subject to merit / availability of 
scholarships. 
13. List of Institutions / Universities where admissions offered would be prepared and will be 
displayed in candidate’s login for choice filling. Eligible candidates under the Scheme are directed 
to choose the courses from these Institutions/ Universities only. It may be noted that “ No 
Scholarship” will be paid to the candidates who take admission in other than the list of Institutions/ 
Universities available  on the portal of AICTE except MBBS/ BDS /allied medicinal 
courses/Central/State Govt. for 
which supernumerary quota is not available. 
14. RESERVATION 
The reservation norms as prescribed for the UTs of J&K and Ladakh (subject to intimation from UTs 
of J&K and Ladakh) in respect of SC, ST, Socially and Economically Backward Classes (SEBC) etc 
are followed for providing scholarship under the Scheme. The break-up is given below:- 
 
i. Scheduled Castes 8% 
ii. Scheduled Tribes 20% 
 i. 1. Bakarwal 2. Balti 3. Beda 4. Bot, Boto 5. 
Brokpa, Drokpa, Dard, Shin 6. Changpa 7. Garra 10% 
 8. Gaddi 9. Gujjar 10. Mon 11. Purigpa 12.  
 Sippi; (existing list as per the Constitution  
 (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Tribes Order,  
 1989 and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)  
 Order (Amendment) Act, 1991.  
 
ii. 1. Gadda Brahmin 2. Koli 3. Paddari Tribe 4. 
 
 Pahari Ethic Group; (added vide the 10% 
 Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled  
 Tribes Order (Amendment) Act, 2024).  
iii. Socially & Educationally Backward Classes (other than 
Scheduled Castes & Schedules Tribes: 
 
(a) Other Backward Classes; 
(b) Residents of areas adjoining line of Actual 
Control (ALC)/International Border (IB); 
 
(c) Residents of Backward Area 
 
 
8% 
 
 
4% 
 
10% 
iv. Economically Weaker Sections (EWSs) 10%  
v. Persons with Disabilities 
 
(a) Children of Defense Personnel 
(b) Children of Para-military Forces and UT 
Police Personnel 
 
(c) Candidates possessing outstanding proficiency 
in sports 
4%  
 3%  
 1% Horizontal 
  Reservation 
 
2% 
 
15. DISBURSEMENT PROCEDURE: 
I. STEPS TO BE TAKEN BY STUDENT FOR DBT: 
a) After joining the institution, the students have to immediately upload their joining report (in the 
prescribed format available on website under SSS J&K 2025-26 tab) before the last date of joining is 
over. The students are required to login to AICTE portal using their credentials which has already 
been created by them at the time of application submission process under SSS J&K and Ladakh. 
b) The joining report will be verified by the Institution post which candidate has to fill and upload the 
necessary documents to start the disbursement process. 
II. STEPS TO BE TAKEN BY INSTITUTE: 
For processing of scholarship, the institute needs to perform the below mentioned task for taking the 
benefit of academic fee in their account. The annual academic fee would be credited in the institute 
account directly which is in the name of institution and their details are submitted to AICTE. The fee 
would be released based on SFRC (State Fee Regulatory Committee/Authority) applicable to that 
particular batch/course with the maximum limit as per scheme guidelines. 
 
a) College will upload documents for claiming  Academic Fee. If the institute is admitting SSS J&K 
candidates for the first time they should apply for the issuance of User ID & Password by clicking 
at: https://www.aicte-india.org/bureaus/jk/2025-2026. 
b) If the institute has already admitted candidates under SSSJ&K, then you may use the old User ID 
& Password and submit SFRC and other documents as per norms. 
c) Login on to AICTE’s J&K Portal using authorized "User Id" & "Password' sent on your official email 
address. 
d) Fill in the necessary information & upload documents namely in 3 tabs: Institute Details, Bank 
Details and Fee Details. 
e) The following documents are to be uploaded in Institute login: 
(i) College Fee Structure/Academic fee (in the prescribed format available on AICTE portal: 
https://www.aicte-india.org/bureaus/jk/2025-2026) 
(ii) Fee as per SFRC (State Fee Regulatory Committee/Authority) / State Govt. issued fee 
fixation document. 
(iii) Mandate Form - Institution accounts details (format available on website under SSSJ&K 2025- 
26 tab) 
(iv) Passbook Copy/Cancelled cheque clearly indicating bank name, Account holders Name, 
Account Number, IFSC code, MICR Code, Bank Address. 
(v) The Institution bank account should not be in the name Trust/Society. 
(vi) Finally click on Submit Button 
Scholarships will be released through PFMS Mechanism only after checking the duplication with the 
National Scholarship Portal and verifying the physical joining report along with other required  
documents including AADHAR Number on AICTE, SSSJ&K portal uploaded and verified by the Institute.  
All the students may upload the Aadhaar seeded saving bank account details only. 
16. MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION 
 
For better and effective implementation and monitoring of this Scheme, constitution of a Committee was 
recommended in CCEA note. Accordingly, a Committee – Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) – on Special 
Scholarship Scheme for Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh was constituted. Inter-Ministerial Committee 
(IMC) is constituted to oversee the implementation of the Scheme and is Chaired by Secretary, 
Department of Higher Education. Adviser Project Appraisal and Management Division (PAMD) and Adviser 
Education, Planning Commission (NITI Aayog), representatives of Department of Expenditure are 
members and representatives of the Ministries of Social Justice &Empowerment, Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and Dept. of Science & Technology 
are invitees. Secretary (Higher Education) and Secretary (School Education), Govt. of Jammu & Kashmir and 
Ladakh are special invitees. STEPS  TO BE TAKEN DURING REGISTRATION: Candidates would be required 
to upload the following documents: 
a) Passport Size photograph (200 x 230 pixels – preferred) 
b) Scanned Signature (140 x 60 pixels – preferred) 
c) Domicile certificate issued by UTs of J&K and Ladakh 
d) SSC Marksheet 
e) Family income certificate (Issued by Tehsildar or equivalent) 
f) Undertaking to be given by the student 
g) AADHAR Number 
h) Category certificate (issued by the Competent Authority of the State Government) 
i) Persons with Disabilities (PwD) must upload Disability Certificate. (40% and above) 
j) Candidates who are already availing the benefits of SSSJ&K are not eligible to apply. 
 General Stream includes admission to B.A./B.Com./B.Sc./B.Sc.(Hon.)/ BBA/BCA etc. 
 Professional courses include B.E./B.Tech. / B. Pharmacy /B. Architecture/Hotel Management & 
Catering Technology/ B.Sc.(Nursing)/BALLB (in National Law Universities only after clearing CLAT 
only). 
 Medical Streams include MBBS / B.D.S./BAMS and Allied Medicinal Courses. 
Note: Saving Bank Account should be seeded with AADHAR Number and in the name of the bonafide student only. 
Candidates may note that Bank Accounts should not be a “No -frill Account” /Minor Account, Parents’ 
Account /Non-Operative account, joint account etc. 
 
WARNING: STUDENTS ENROLED IN NATIONAL SCHOLARSHIP PORTAL (NSP) AS A BENEFICIARY 
AND/OR ALREADY AVAILING SCHOLARSHIP ARE NOT ELIGIBLE FOR THE SSSJKL AS PER THE 
GUIDELINES OF THE SCHEME. 
 
***** 
 